Now how do you validate user input?
Well obviously we got our user entering some data into a form, we got our server
where we want to handle that
and now we got a couple of places where we can add validation.
For example we can validate on the client side with the help of javascript,
so before any request is sent, we can write some javascript that for example watches the inputs for key
events,
so for the user typing and then checks the input whilst the user is working on the form and then you can
display an error because you can use javascript to change the dom at runtime,
you can display an error right in the browser before anything is sent to the server.
Now this can greatly enhance your user experience and it is something which I discuss in my dedicated
javascript and javascript framework
courses like my react course, my angular course and it's totally optional,
that is important.
It can definitely improve the user experience and therefore you might want to consider using it
but it is optional because since we use client side javascript, so javascript code that runs in the browser,
the user can see that code, the user could change that code and the user can of course disable javascript.
So this is not a protection that secures you against incorrect data being sent to your server,
this is not a secure solution,
it's only there to improve the user experience because of course there you can validate and you can
show a nice error message and keep the old input so that the user doesn't have to re-enter that email
address where the @ sign was forgotten
but it's only for a user experience thing,
it's not really secure.
So your next option is to validate on the server side.
Now this is what we'll focus on in this module and in this course because this is of course what we do
with nodejs.
We have to do that because this code can't be seen or changed by the user,
the user can't disable us using that code because it happens on the server, not in the browser
and this is the crucial part where we have to add validation, where we really have to filter out invalid
values,
so this is a must have, it's absolutely required and it is what we'll focus on. And this then ensures that
we only work with valid data in our node app and ultimately if we do plan on storing it, that we do store
correct data.
Now also important, for some database engines and for most database engines actually, like for example
mongodb,
there is also a built in validation which you can turn on,
I do cover that for the example in
my mongodb course if you want to learn more about that.
It's also optional because this can be a last resort but if you have good server side validation in
place as you should have, then this might not be required because there is not really a scenario where
invalid data could reach your database because you filter it out in that server side validation already ready.
No matter which approach you have if you validate on the server side and or in the database, though
or is not really an option
you should validate on the server side at all means but no matter what you choose, in the end
this can of course fail and then you should always return an error message,
a helpful error message if possible and never reload the page but always keep the data the user already
inserted because that of course is a horrible user experience which we all know that you enter something
incorrect and you get back
hey this password is not known or this e-mail address is unknown and you have to enter it all again.
So this is another part on which I'll focus in this module, that we provide a good user experience. And
with that we know how to do validation at least in theory,
time to turn that into practice.